The Project Gutenberg EBook of Project Gutenberg (1971-2008), by Marie Lebert

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

** This is a COPYRIGHTED Project Gutenberg eBook, Details Below **
**     Please follow the copyright guidelines in this file.     **

Title: Project Gutenberg (1971-2008)

Author: Marie Lebert

Release Date: October 26, 2008 [EBook #27045]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PROJECT GUTENBERG (1971-2008) ***




Produced by Al Haines









PROJECT GUTENBERG (1971-2008)


MARIE LEBERT


NEF, University of Toronto & Project Gutenberg, 2008

Copyright (C) 2008 Marie Lebert

This long article is dated May 2008. With many thanks to the great people who
helped me, especially Michael Hart, founder of Project Gutenberg, and Russon
Wooldridge, founder of NEF. All the mistakes are mine - my mother tongue is not
English, but French. This article is also available in French: Le Projet
Gutenberg (1971-2008).


TABLE


1. Overview

2. A Bet Since 1971

3. The Method

4. Shared Proofreading

5. Becoming Multingual

6. Public Domain vs. Copyright

7. From the Past to the Future

8. Chronology

9. Stats

10. Links


1. OVERVIEW


August 1997: 1,000 books; April 2002: 5,000 books; October 2003: 10,000 books;
January 2005: 15,000 books; December 2006: 20,000 books; April 2008: 25,000
books.

In July 1971, Michael Hart created Project Gutenberg with the goal of making
available for free, and electronically, literary works belonging to public
domain. A pioneer site in a number of ways, Project Gutenberg was the first
information provider on the internet and is the oldest digital library. When the
internet became popular, in the mid-1990s, the project got a boost and an
international dimension. The number of electronic books rose from 1,000 (in
August 1997) to 5,000 (in April 2002), 10,000 (in October 2003), 15,000 (in
January 2005), 20,000 (in December 2006) and 25,000 (in April 2008), with a
current production rate of around 340 new books each month. With 55 languages
and 40 mirror sites around the world, books are being downloaded by the tens of
thousands every day. Project Gutenberg promotes digitization in "text format",
meaning that a book can be copied, indexed, searched, analyzed and compared with
other books. Contrary to other formats, the files are accessible for
low-bandwidth use. The main source of new Project Gutenberg eBooks is
Distributed Proofreaders, launched in October 2000 by Charles Franks to help in
the digitizing of books from public domain.


2. A BET SINCE 1971


= In a Few Words

If the print book is 5 centuries and a half old, the electronic book is only 37
years old. It is born with Project Gutenberg, created by Michael Hart in July
1971 to make available for free electronic versions of literary books belonging
to public domain. A pioneer site in a number of ways, Project Gutenberg was the
first information provider on an embryonic internet and is the oldest digital
library. Long considered by its critics as impossible on a large scale, Project
Gutenberg counted 25,000 books in April 2008, with tens of thousands downloads
daily. To this day, nobody has done a better job of putting the world's
literature at everyone's disposal. And to create a vast network of volunteers
all over the world, without wasting people's skills or energy.

During the fist twenty years, Michael Hart himself keyed in the first hundred
books, with the occasional help of others from time to time. When the internet
became popular, in the mid-1990s, the project got a boost and an international
dimension. Michael still typed and scanned in books, but now coordinated the
work of dozens and then hundreds of volunteers in many countries. The number of
electronic books rose from 1,000 (in August 1997) to 2,000 (in May 1999), 3,000
(in December 2000) and 4,000 (in October 2001).

37 years after its birth, Project Gutenberg is running at full capacity. It had
5,000 books online in April 2002, 10,000 books in October 2003, 15,000 books in
January 2005, 20,000 books  in December 2006 and 25,000 books in April 2008,
with 340 new books available per month, 40 mirror sites in a number of
countries, books downloaded by the tens of thousands every day, and tens of
thousands of volunteers in various teams.

Whether they were digitized 30 years ago or they are digitized now, all the
books are captured in Plain Vanilla ASCII (the original 7-bit ASCII), with the
same formatting rules, so they can be read easily by any machine, operating
system or software, including on a PDA, a cell phone or an eBook reader. Any
individual or organization is free to convert them to different formats, without
any restriction except respect for copyright laws in the country involved.

In January 2004, Project Gutenberg had spread across the Atlantic with the
creation of Project Gutenberg Europe. On top of its original mission, it also
became a bridge between languages and cultures, with a number of national and
linguistic sections. While adhering to the same principle: books for all and for
free, through electronic versions that can be used and reproduced indefinitely.
And, as a second step, the digitization of images and sound, in the same spirit.

= Beginning and Persevering

Let us get back to the beginnings of the project. When he was a student at the
University of Illinois (USA), Michael Hart was given $100,000,000 of computer
time at the Materials Research Lab of his university. On July 4, 1971, on
Independence Day, Michael keyed in The United States Declaration of Independence
(signed on July 4, 1776) to the mainframe he was using. In upper case, because
there was no lower case yet. But to send a 5 K file to the 100 users of the
embryonic internet would have crashed the network. So Michael mentioned where
the eText was stored (though without a hypertext link, because the web was still
20 years ahead). It was downloaded by six users. Project Gutenberg was born.

Michael decided to use this huge amount of computer time to search the public
domain books that were stored in our libraries, and to digitize these books. He
also decided to store the electronic texts (eTexts) in the simplest way, using
the plain text format called Plain Vanilla ASCII, so they can be read easily by
any machine, operating system or software. A book would become a continuous text
file instead of a set of pages, with caps for the terms in italic, bold or
underlined of the print version.

Soon afterwards he defined Project Gutenberg's mission: to put at everyone's
disposal, in electronic versions, as many literary works of the public domain as
possible for free. As he stated years later, in August 1998, "We consider eText
to be a new medium, with no real relationship to paper, other than presenting
the same material, but I don't see how paper can possibly compete once people
each find their own comfortable way to eTexts, especially in schools."

After he keyed in The United States Declaration of Independence in 1971, Michael
went on in 1972 and typed in a longer text, The United States Bill of Rights,
that includes the ten first amendments added in 1789 to the Constitution (dated
1787) and defining the individual rights of the citizens and the distinct powers
ot the Federal Government and the States. In 1973, Michael typed in the full
text of The United States Constitution.

From one year to the next, disk space was getting larger, by the standards of
the time (there was no hard disk yet), so it was possible to plan bigger files.
Michael began typing in the Bible, because the individual books of the Bible
could be processed separately as different files. He also worked on the
collected works of Shakespeare, with one play at a time, and a file for each
play. That edition of Shakespeare was never released, due to copyright changes.
If Shakespeare's works belong to the public domain, the comments and notes may
be copyrighted, depending on the publication date. But other editions belonging
to the public domain were posted a few years later.

In parallel, the internet, which was still embryonic in 1971, was born in 1974
with the creation of TCP/IP (Transmission Control Protocol / Internet Protocol)
by Vinton Cerf and Bob Kahn. Its rapid expansion started in 1983.

= 10 to 10,000 Books

In August 1989, Project Gutenberg completed its 10th book, The King James Bible,
that was first published in 1611, with the standard text dated 1769. In 1990,
there were 250,000 internet users, and the standard was 360 K disks. In January
1991, Michael typed in Alice's Adventures in Wonderland, by Lewis Carroll
(published in 1865). In July 1991, he typed in Peter Pan, by James M. Barrie
(published in 1904). These two worldwide classics of childhood literature each
fitted on one disk.

1991 was also the year the web became operational. The first browser, Mosaic,
was released in November 1993. As the web was becoming a popular medium, it
became easier to circulate eTexts and recruit volunteers. Project Gutenberg
gradually got into its stride, with the digitization of one book per month in
1991, two books per month in 1992, four books per month in 1993 and eight books
per month in 1994. In January 1994, Project Gutenberg celebrated its 100th book
by releasing The Complete Works of William Shakespeare. Shakespeare wrote most
of his work between 1590 and 1613. The steady growth went on, with an average of
8 books per month in 1994, 16 books per month in 1995, and 32 books per month in
1996.

As we can see, from 1991 to 1996, the "output" doubled every year. While
continuing to digitize books, Michael was also coordinating the work of dozens
of volunteers. At the end of 1993, Project Gutenberg's eTexts were organized
into three main sections: a) "Light Literature", such as Alice's Adventures in
Wonderland, Peter Pan or Aesop's Fables; b) "Heavy Literature", such as the
Bible, Shakespeare's works or Moby Dick; c) "Reference Literature", such as
Roget's Thesaurus, and a set of encyclopaedias and dictionaries. This
organization in three sections was abandoned later for a more detailed
classification.

Project Gutenberg's goal is to be "universal" both for the literary works that
are chosen and the audience who reads them. The goal is to put literature at
everyone's disposal. With a focus on books that many people would use
frequently, and not only students and teachers. For example, the "Light
Literature" section is intended for pre-schoolers as well as their grandparents.
The aim is that they will want to look up the eText of Peter Pan when they come
back from watching Hook at the movies. Or that they will read the eText of
Alice's Adventures in Wonderland after seeing it on TV. Or that they will look
for the context of a quotation after hearing it in one of the Star Trek
episodes; nearly every episode of Star Trek quotes from books which are in the
Project Gutenberg collections.

The idea is that, whether they were avid readers of print books or not in the
past, people should easily be able to look up quotations they hear in
conversations, movies, music, or they read in books, newspapers and magazines,
within a library containing all these quotations in an easy-to-use format.
eTexts don't take up much space in ASCII format. They can be easily downloaded
with a standard phone line. Searching a word or a phrase is simple too. People
can easily search an entire eText by using the plain "search" menu available in
any program.

In 1997, the "output" was still an average of 32 books per month. In June 1997,
Project Gutenberg released The Merry Adventures of Robin Hood, by Howard Pyle
(published in 1883). In August 1997, it released its 1000th book, La Divina
Commedia di Dante (published in 1321), in Italian, its original language.

In August 1998, Michael wrote: "My own personal goal is to put 10,000 eTexts on
the Net [editor's note: his goal was reached in October 2003] and if I can get
some major support, I would like to expand that to 1,000,000 and to also expand
our potential audience for the average eText from 1.x% of the world population
to over 10%, thus changing our goal from giving away 1,000,000,000,000 eTexts to
1,000 times as many, a trillion and a quadrillion in US terminology."

= 1,000 to 10,000 Books

From 1998 to 2000, there was a steadfast average of 36 new books per month. In
May 1999, there were 2,000 books. The 2000th book was Don Quijote, by Cervantes
(published in 1605), in Spanish, its original language.

Released in December 2000, the 3000th book was the third volume of A l'ombre des
jeunes filles en fleurs (In the Shadow of Young Girls in Flower), by Marcel
Proust (published in 1919), in French, its original language. Around 104 books
per month were released in 2001.

Released in October 2001, the 4000th book was The French Immortals Series, in
English. Published in 1905 by Maison Mazarin, Paris, this book is an anthology
of short fictions by authors belonging to the renowned French Academy (Academie
francaise), notably Emile Souvestre, Pierre Loti, Hector Malot, Charles de
Bernard and Alphonse Daudet.

Available in April 2002, the 5000th book was The Notebooks of Leonardo da Vinci,
which he wrote at the beginning of the 16th century. A text that is steadily in
the Top 100 of downloaded texts.

In 1988, Michael Hart chose to digitize Alice's Adventures in Wonderland and
Peter Pan because they each fitted on one 360 K disk, the standard of the time.
Fifteen years later, in 2002, 1.44 M is the standard disk and ZIP is the
standard compression. The practical file size is about 3 million characters,
more than long enough for the average book. The digitized ASCII version of a
300-page novel is 1 M. A bulky book can fit in two ASCII files, that can be
downloaded as is or in ZIP format.

An average of 50 hours is necessary to get an eText selected, copyright-cleared,
scanned, proofread, formatted and assembled.

A few numbers are reserved for "special" books. For example, eBook number 1984
is reserved for George Orwell's classic, published in 1949, and still a long way
from falling into the public domain.

In 2002, around 100 books were released per month. In Spring 2002, Project
Gutenberg's books represented 1/4 of all the public domain works freely
available on the web and listed nearly exhaustively by the Internet Public
Library (IPL). An impressive result thanks to the relentless work of thousands
of volunteers in several countries.

1,000 books in August 1997, 2,000 books in May 1999, 3,000 books in December
2000, 4,000 books in October 2001, 5,000 books in April 2002, 10,000 books in
October 2003. eBook number 10000 is The Magna Carta, the first English
constitutional text, signed in 1215. From April 2002 to October 2003, in 18
months, the number of books doubled, going from 5,000 to 10,000, with a monthly
average of 300 new digitized books.

10,000 books. An impressive number if we think about all the scanned and
proofread pages this number represents. A fast growth thanks to Distributed
Proofreaders, a website launched in October 2000 by Charles Franks to share the
proofreading of books between many volunteers. Volunteers choose one of the
books listed on the site and proofread a given page. They don't have any quota
to fulfill, but it is recommended they do a page per day if possible. It doesn't
seem much, but with hundreds of volunteers it really adds up.

Books are also copied on CDs and DVDs. Blank CDs and DVDs cost next to nothing,
as does their burning on a CD or DVD writer. Project Gutenberg sends a free CD
or DVD to anyone who asks for it, and people are encouraged to make copies for a
friend, a library or a school. Released in August 2003, the "Best of Gutenberg"
CD contained over 600 books, as a follow-up to other CDs in the past). The first
Project Gutenberg DVD was released in December 2003 to celebrate the landmark of
10,000 books, with most of the existing titles (9,400 books).

= 10,000 to 20,000 Books
